User feature (#2290)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2022-06-01-user-feature-install.adoc

Jiwoo Lim <https://github.com/jjiwooLim>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
:source-highlighter: highlight.js

You can extend the capability of Open Liberty by writing your own features, known as _user features_ and installing them onto the Open Liberty runtime. For example, you can develop a user feature to configure a custom authentication provider or incorporate custom functions that aren't shipped with Open Liberty.

== What is an Open Liberty user feature?
An Open Liberty user feature is a customized Open Liberty feature which consists of a definition file, or feature manifest, and a collection of link:https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/wasdtfe?topic=overview-osgi-bundles[OSGi bundles]. The OSGi bundles provide classes and services that correspond to providing a particular capability in the Open Liberty runtime environment.  

To develop the Open Liberty user feature, you need to create your own feature definition file and add your OSGi bundle(s). In this post, we’ll walk through the use of several Maven plug-ins to build and install a custom Open Liberty feature.

== Creating an Open Liberty user feature

> In this blog, we will use Eclipse with an Open Liberty link:https://start.openliberty.io[starter application] to create a Maven project for the user feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog, we will use Eclipse IDE with an Open Liberty link:https://start.openliberty.io[starter application] to create a Maven project for the user feature.
```

We will walk through the following steps of developing a user feature:

- Create an OSGi bundle containing your Java classes using link:https://felix.apache.org/documentation/subprojects/apache-felix-maven-bundle-plugin-bnd.html#_using_the_plugin[Apache Felix Maven Bundle Plugin (BND)].
- Package your OSGi bundle to Enterprise Subsystem Archive (ESA) file with link:https://aries.apache.org/documentation/modules/esamavenpluginproject.html[ESA Maven Plugin]. The ESA file is the file format required to install the user feature to an Open Liberty runtime environment.
- Create a Bill of Materials (BOM) for your ESA file that will be consumed by Liberty Maven Plugin when preparing and installing the Open Liberty user feature.
- Install your Open Liberty user feature on to Open Liberty runtime by using link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/ci.maven[Liberty Maven Plugin].

'''
=== Developing an OSGi bundle with simple activation

> The OSGi bundle is the unit of deployment for an application that has an independent lifecycle. You can create the OSGi bundle with any of your java classes, but in this example we will create a Java class that implements the `BundleActivator` interface to control the lifecycle of the OSGi bundle. When you start and stop the Open Liberty server, the start and stop methods of the `BundleActivator` interface are called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OSGi bundle is the unit of deployment for an application that has an independent lifecycle. You can create the OSGi bundle with any of your java classes, but in this example we will create a Java class that implements the `BundleActivator` interface to control the lifecycle of the OSGi bundle. When you start and stop the Open Liberty runtime, the start and stop methods of the `BundleActivator` interface are called.
```

                    </instructions>
                </configuration>
            </plugin>
        </plugins>
    </build>
</project>
----
Run `mvn clean install` to build the bundle. Inside the bundle JAR file, you will find the MANIFEST.MF file with the metadata of the bundle.
+
.MANIFEST.MF
[source,txt]
----
Manifest-Version: 1.0
Bnd-LastModified: 1644446481175
Build-Jdk: 11.0.10
Built-By: jiwoolim
Bundle-Activator: com.example.bundle.Activator
Bundle-ManifestVersion: 2
Bundle-Name: SimpleActivator
Bundle-SymbolicName: com.example.bundle.Activator
Bundle-Version: 1.0.0
Created-By: Apache Maven Bundle Plugin
Export-Package: com.example.bundle;uses:="org.osgi.framework";version
 ="1.0.0"
Import-Package: org.osgi.framework;version="[1.8,2)"
Require-Capability: osgi.ee;filter:="(&(osgi.ee=JavaSE)(version=1.6))"
Tool: Bnd-3.3.0.201609221906
----

'''
=== Building an Enterprise Subsystem Archive
The Enterprise Subsystem Archive (ESA) is an archive file (i.e. zip) containing the SUBSYSTEM.MF manifest file. The contents of this manifest file provide information on how to install, resolve and start the bundle.

> We will use the link:https://aries.apache.org/documentation/modules/esamavenpluginproject.html[esa-maven-plugin] to package our bundle and to generate OpenLiberty feature manifest (SUBSYSTEM.MF) file. Create a new Maven project, set the `packaging` type to *esa*, add the OSGi bundle dependency from earlier, and add appropriate headers for the manifest file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will use the link:https://aries.apache.org/documentation/modules/esamavenpluginproject.html[esa-maven-plugin] to package our bundle and to generate Open Liberty feature manifest (SUBSYSTEM.MF) file. Create a new Maven project, set the `packaging` type to *esa*, add the OSGi bundle dependency from earlier, and add appropriate headers for the manifest file. 
```

  <packaging>esa</packaging> <!-- set packaging type to esa -->

  <dependencies>
    <!-- Add OSGi bundle -->
    <dependency>
		<groupId>test.user.test.osgi</groupId>
    	<artifactId>SimpleActivator</artifactId>
    	<version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
	</dependency>
  </dependencies>

  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.aries</groupId>
        <artifactId>esa-maven-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>1.0.0</version>
        <extensions>true</extensions>
        <configuration>
          <generateManifest>true</generateManifest>
          <archiveContent>all</archiveContent>
          <instructions>
            <Subsystem-Vendor>IBM</Subsystem-Vendor>
            <IBM-Feature-Version>2</IBM-Feature-Version>
            <IBM-ShortName>SimpleActivator</IBM-ShortName>
            <Subsystem-Type>osgi.subsystem.feature</Subsystem-Type>
            <Subsystem-SymbolicName>
                com.example.bundle.Activator;visibility:=public
            </Subsystem-SymbolicName>
            <Subsystem-Version>1.0.0</Subsystem-Version>
          </instructions>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
----

> By default it will not generate the manifest file, so we have to set the `generateManifest` header to *true*. To install the feature on to OpenLiberty runtime, we need to set the *visibility* directive to "public". We can do so by setting the `Subsystem-SymbolicName` header to "_Bundle-SymbolicName;visibility:=public_". If the *visibility* is set to `protected|private`, Liberty Maven Plugin will not be able to resolve the feature. Also, the mandatory header `Subsystem-Content` will be created automatically by the plugin. `IBM-ShortName` is optional header alias to `Subsystem-SymbolicName`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default it will not generate the manifest file, so we have to set the `generateManifest` header to *true*. To install the feature on to Open Liberty runtime, we need to set the *visibility* directive to "public". We can do so by setting the `Subsystem-SymbolicName` header to "_Bundle-SymbolicName;visibility:=public_". If the *visibility* is set to `protected|private`, Liberty Maven Plugin will not be able to resolve the feature. Also, the mandatory header `Subsystem-Content` will be created automatically by the plugin. `IBM-ShortName` is optional header alias to `Subsystem-SymbolicName`.
```

  <groupId>test.user.test.osgi</groupId>
  <artifactId>features-bom</artifactId>
  <version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
  <packaging>pom</packaging>
  <name>user features bill of materials</name>
  <description>user features bill of materials</description>
  <url>https://openliberty.io/</url>

  <dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>test.user.test.osgi</groupId>
        <artifactId>SimpleActivatorESA-</artifactId>
        <version>1.0.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
        <scope>runtime</scope>
      </dependency>
    </dependencies>
  </dependencyManagement>
</project>
----
Run `mvn clean install` to create `features-bom.pom` BOM file.

'''
=== Installing an Open Liberty user feature by using the Liberty Maven Plugin

[start=1]
. Create a link:https://start.openliberty.io[starter application] from Open Liberty website. Then, add the following configuration to create a server. 
+
----
<plugin>
   <groupId>io.openliberty.tools</groupId>
   <artifactId>liberty-maven-plugin</artifactId>
   <!-- Specify configuration, executions for liberty-maven-plugin -->
   <configuration>
      <serverName>test</serverName>
   </configuration>
</plugin>
----

> . Run `mvn liberty:create` to create an Open Liberty server `test`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Run `mvn liberty:create` to create an Open Liberty instance named `test`
```

. Specify the feature to install for the `test` server.
+

> Open `${project.build.testOutputDirectory}/wlp/server.xml` file and add the user feature. The `usr` extension indicates that the feature will be installed to the `${project.build.testOutputDirectory}/wlp/usr` or `$WLP_USER_DIR` directory. It also tells the server where to find the user feature when the server starts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open `${project.build.testOutputDirectory}/wlp/server.xml` file and add the user feature. The `usr` extension indicates that the feature will be installed to the `${project.build.testOutputDirectory}/wlp/usr` or `$WLP_USER_DIR` directory. It also tells Liberty where to find the user feature when it starts.
```

+
[source, xml]
.server.xml
----
<featureManager>
  <acceptLicense>true</acceptLicense>
  <feature>usr:SimpleActivator</feature>
</featureManager>
----

. Import the BOM file we created earlier by adding the following to the pom.xml.
+
[source, xml]
----
<dependencyManagement>
   <dependencies>
     <dependency>
       <groupId>test.user.test.osgi</groupId>
       <artifactId>features-bom</artifactId>
       <version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
       <type>pom</type>
     </dependency>
   </dependencies>
 </dependencyManagement>
----

> . Run `mvn liberty:prepare-feature` to generate a `features.json` file. The `features.json` file is a JSON file that contains the information found within a feature's ESA manifest file. JSONs are a key requirement for the installation of any Open Liberty features(s) from a Maven repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Run `mvn liberty:prepare-feature` to generate a `features.json` file. The `features.json` file is a JSON file that contains the information found within a feature's ESA manifest file. Such a JSON file is required to install any Open Liberty features(s) from a Maven repository.
```

. Run `mvn liberty:install-feature liberty:start` to install the user feature and start the server. In the server `messages.log`, you will see `"Sample bundle starting"` when the server starts and `"Sample bundle stopping"` when the server stops, which is the logic we implemented in our `BundleActivator` class.
+
[source, txt]
.messages.log
----
A CWWKE0001I: The server test has been
I CWWKE0002I: The kernel started after 0.571
I CWWKF0007I: Feature update
O Sample bundle starting
A CWWKF0012I: The server installed the following features:
I CWWKF0008I: Feature update completed in 0.091
A CWWKF0011I: The test server is ready to run a smarter planet. The test server started in 0.663
A CWWKE0055I: Server shutdown requested on Monday, February 14, 2022 at 6:03 p.m.. The server test is shutting
A CWWKE1100I: Waiting for up to 30 seconds for the server to
I CWWKE1101I: Server quiesce
O Sample bundle stopping
A CWWKE0036I: The server test stopped after 21 minutes, 4.4
----

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have successfully created a custom user feature for Liberty and installed it!

```

---
layout: post
title: "Build and install a Liberty user feature by using Maven plug-ins"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/jjiwooLim
author_github: https://github.com/jjiwoLim
seo-title: Build and install a Open Liberty user feature by using Maven plug-ins.
seo-description: You can extend the capability of Open Liberty by writing your own features and installing them onto the runtime.
blog_description: "You can extend the capability of Open Liberty by writing your own features and installing them onto the runtime."
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
---
= Build and install an Open Liberty user feature by using Maven plug-ins
Jiwoo Lim <https://github.com/jjiwooLim>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
:source-highlighter: highlight.js

You can extend the capability of Open Liberty by writing your own features and installing them onto the runtime. For example, you can develop a user feature to configure a custom authentication provider or incorporate custom functions that aren't shipped with Open Liberty.

> == What is an Open Liberty feature?

Reviewer 2: It's not just a feature they're writing. It's a user feature, which means they're using the public APIs. I think that needs to be explained. And that user features are OSGi features.

Reviewer 2: eg insert another sentence after the first one in the following paragraph saying something like "A user feature is an Open Liberty feature that implements the Liberty public APIs..." (or something - I don't think that's necessarily the correct wording).

Reviewer 2: Is it useful to say too (@yeekangc ) that OSGi enables Liberty to start the features on the fly etc etc? Basic OSGi benefits rather than assuming the reader cares that it's OSGi?

Reviewer: +1 to at least bridge the gap or jump from user features to OSGi.  We may not have to go into a lot of details but there is a conceptual jump in the current draft.

Reviewer 3: I intentionally didn't include references to public API because I didn't make use of it. I don't think it's required to develop a user feature.

Reviewer 2: okay, but I think it needs to be clear that you're creating a Liberty user feature, not a Liberty feature (which would have to be dropped into our internals, I think), and briefly what the difference is. And use the terms consistently. So for example, "You can extend the capability of Open Liberty by writing your own features, known as _user features_, and installing them on to the runtime." or similar. Then the heading is "What are Open Liberty user features?" and so on.

An Open Liberty feature consists of a definition file, or feature manifest, and a collection of OSGi bundles that provide classes and services that correspond to providing a particular capability in the Open Liberty runtime environment. In this post, we’ll walk through the use of several Maven plug-ins to build and install a custom Open Liberty feature.

> === What is an OSGi bundle?

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need this sub-heading. It calls out the OSGi bundle as being important when it's not what a reader will be skimming for. I think instead it should just be a second paragraph in the "What is an Open Liberty feature?" section.

The link:https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/wasdtfe?topic=overview-osgi-bundles[OSGi bundle] is a Java archive file (JAR) file that contains Java code, resources, and a manifest that describes the bundle and its dependencies. The bundle is the unit of deployment for an application. The OSGi manifest file contains metadata that enables the OSGi Framework to process the modular aspects of the bundle.

== Creating a user feature

In this blog, we will use Eclipse to create a Maven project. For more information, check out link:{url-prefix}/guides/maven-intro.html[Building a web application with Maven].

> Alternatively, you can link:https://start.openliberty.io[create and download starter application] from the Open Liberty website.

Reviewer 2: Don't send them off to the Maven guide here. It just complicates things. Just tell them they'll be using the starter project at this point:
"In this blog, we will use Eclipse with a starter application to create a Maven project for the user feature."

Using the starter app is not the "alternative" path, it's the path they should take (in this blog post).

In this post, we walk through the following steps of developing a user feature:

- Create an OSGi bundle containing your Java classes using link:https://felix.apache.org/documentation/subprojects/apache-felix-maven-bundle-plugin-bnd.html#_using_the_plugin[Apache Felix Maven Bundle Plugin (BND)]
- Package your OSGi bundle to Enterprise Subsystem Archive (ESA) file with link:https://aries.apache.org/documentation/modules/esamavenpluginproject.html[ESA Maven Plugin]
- Create a Bill of Materials (BOM) for your ESA file

> - Install your Open Liberty user feature onto Open Liberty runtime by using link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/ci.maven[Liberty Maven Plugin]

Reviewer 2: I think each of these steps needs a very brief sentence saying "why". Why does the BOM matter? Why do you need to package your OSGi bundle as an ESA?

Also "onto" should be "on to".

'''

> === Developing an OSGi bundle with simple activation

Reviewer 2: It's fairly safe to say that most readers won't know much about OSGi. I think less needs to be assumed about OSGi concepts here (if the concept is necessary for creating a user feature).

The most straightforward way to control the lifecycle of your OSGi bundle code is to implement the `org.osgi.framework.BundleActivator` interface in one of the classes within your bundle. The `BundleActivator` start and stop methods are called when the server starts or stops.

[start=1]

> . Create a Maven project with your desired Maven coordinates.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure which steps this is relevant to but tell them to user the starter project and assume that they are.

Give a link to the Maven guide for further info at the end of the section or the end of the blog post for more info about the OL Maven plugin.

Reviewer 3: I wanted the users to create a new Maven project (or pom.xml) for each of these steps. I asked them to download the starter application in `Installing an Open Liberty user feature by using the Liberty Maven Plugin`

> . Create a Maven project with your desired Maven coordinates.

Reviewer 2: Each of these steps needs to end in either a colon (:) when preceding a piece of code or example, or with a full-stop/period (.) if it doesn't. Don't leave steps hanging without any final punctuation - it looks messy but also screws with accessibility technology.

+
[source, txt]
----
Group Id : test.user.test.osgi
Artifact Id : SimpleActivator
Version : 0.0.1-SNAPSHOT
----

. Add the `org.osgi.core` dependency
+
[source, xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.osgi</groupId>
    <artifactId>org.osgi.core</artifactId>
    <version>6.0.0</version>
</dependency>
----

. Create an implementation for the OSGi `BundleActivator` class in the project
+
[source, java]
----
package com.example.bundle;

import org.osgi.framework.BundleActivator;
import org.osgi.framework.BundleContext;

public class Activator implements BundleActivator {
	public void start(BundleContext context) throws Exception {
		System.out.println("Sample bundle starting");
		// Insert bundle activation logic here
	}

	public void stop(BundleContext context) throws Exception {
		System.out.println("Sample bundle stopping");
		// Insert bundle deactivation logic here
	}
}
----

> . Build the Bundle

Reviewer 2: "Bundle" should be "bundle" here I think?

+

> To use the maven-bundle-plugin, explicitly specify `packaging` as `bundle` in the `pom.xml` file.

Reviewer 2: What does the `maven-bundle-plugin` do? Needs to briefly explain why they need to do this step.
Also, doesn't that plugin have a proper name, eg "Maven bundle plugin" or "Maven bundle plugin (maven-bundle-plugin)"? Or is this the "Apache Felix Maven Bundle Plugin (BND)" mentioned earlier? Either way, make it clear.

+
[source, xml]
----
<packaging>bundle</packaging>
----
+

> We also need to specify the configuration. The `Bundle-SymbolicName` is the only required header for most cases but may require other OSGi headers depending on your implementation.

Reviewer 2: How do they know whether their implementation requires other OSGi headers or not? And which headers they might need?

	    <artifactId>org.osgi.core</artifactId>
	    <version>6.0.0</version>
	    <scope>provided</scope>
		</dependency>
	</dependencies>

    <build>
        <plugins>
            <plugin>
                <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
                <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
                <version>3.8.1</version>
            </plugin>
            <plugin>
                <groupId>org.apache.felix</groupId>
                <artifactId>maven-bundle-plugin</artifactId>
                <version>3.3.0</version>
                <extensions>true</extensions>
                <configuration>
                    <instructions>
                        <Bundle-SymbolicName>
                          com.example.bundle.Activator
                        </Bundle-SymbolicName>
                        <Bundle-Name>SimpleActivator</Bundle-Name>
                        <Bundle-Version>1.0.0</Bundle-Version>
                        <Bundle-Activator>com.example.bundle.Activator</Bundle-Activator>
                    </instructions>
                </configuration>
            </plugin>
        </plugins>
    </build>
</project>
----

> Run `**_mvn clean install_**` to build the bundle. Inside the bundle JAR file, you will find the MANIFEST.MF file with the metadata of the bundle.

Author: ```suggestion
Run `mvn clean install` to build the bundle. Inside the bundle JAR file, you will find the MANIFEST.MF file with the metadata of the bundle.
```

  <packaging>esa</packaging> <!-- set packaging type to esa -->

  <dependencies>
    <!-- Add OSGi bundle -->
    <dependency>
		<groupId>test.user.test.osgi</groupId>
    	<artifactId>SimpleActivator</artifactId>
    	<version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
	</dependency>
  </dependencies>

  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.apache.aries</groupId>
        <artifactId>esa-maven-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>1.0.0</version>
        <extensions>true</extensions>
        <configuration>
          <generateManifest>true</generateManifest>
          <archiveContent>all</archiveContent>
          <instructions>
            <Subsystem-Vendor>IBM</Subsystem-Vendor>
            <IBM-Feature-Version>2</IBM-Feature-Version>
            <IBM-ShortName>SimpleActivator</IBM-ShortName>
            <Subsystem-Type>osgi.subsystem.feature</Subsystem-Type>
            <Subsystem-SymbolicName>
                com.example.bundle.Activator;visibility:=public
            </Subsystem-SymbolicName>
            <Subsystem-Version>1.0.0</Subsystem-Version>
          </instructions>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
----

> By default it will not generate a manifest, so we have to set the `generateManifest` header to *true*. To install the feature, we need to set the *visibility* directive to "public". We can do so by setting the `Subsystem-SymbolicName` header to "_Bundle-SymbolicName;visibility:=public_". If the *visibility* is set to `protected|private`, Liberty Maven Plugin will not be able to resolve the feature. Also, the mandatory header `Subsystem-Content` will be created automatically by the plugin. `IBM-ShortName` is optional header alias to `Subsystem-SymbolicName``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default it will not generate a manifest, so we have to set the `generateManifest` header to *true*. To install the feature, we need to set the *visibility* directive to "public". We can do so by setting the `Subsystem-SymbolicName` header to "_Bundle-SymbolicName;visibility:=public_". If the *visibility* is set to `protected|private`, Liberty Maven Plugin will not be able to resolve the feature. Also, the mandatory header `Subsystem-Content` will be created automatically by the plugin. `IBM-ShortName` is optional header alias to `Subsystem-SymbolicName`.
```

> Run `**_mvn clean install_**` to create an ESA file. Inside the ESA file, you will find your bundle JAR and SUBSYSTEM.MF.

Author: ```suggestion
Run `mvn clean install` to create an ESA file. Inside the ESA file, you will find your bundle JAR and SUBSYSTEM.MF.
```

Create a Bill of Materials (BOM) for the user feature ESA file. The BOM is a pom file that manages the dependencies of the project. The Liberty Maven Plugin `prepare-feature` and `install-feature` goals require a BOM file to install an Open Liberty user feature onto the Open Liberty runtime.
[source, xml]
.pom.xml
----
<project xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd" xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0"
    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance">
  <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

  <groupId>test.user.test.osgi</groupId>
  <artifactId>features-bom</artifactId>
  <version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
  <packaging>pom</packaging>
  <name>user features bill of materials</name>
  <description>user features bill of materials</description>
  <url>https://openliberty.io/</url>

  <dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
      <dependency>
        <groupId>test.user.test.osgi</groupId>
        <artifactId>SimpleActivatorESA-</artifactId>
        <version>1.0.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
        <scope>runtime</scope>
      </dependency>
    </dependencies>
  </dependencyManagement>
</project>
----

> Run `**_mvn clean install_**` to create `features-bom.pom` BOM file.

Author: ```suggestion
Run `mvn clean install` to create `features-bom.pom` BOM file.
```

'''
=== Installing an Open Liberty user feature by using the Liberty Maven Plugin

[start=1]
. To enable the link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/ci.maven[Liberty Maven Plugin] in your project, add the following to your pom.xml
+
----
<plugin>
   <groupId>io.openliberty.tools</groupId>
   <artifactId>liberty-maven-plugin</artifactId>
   <!-- Specify configuration, executions for liberty-maven-plugin -->
   <configuration>
      <serverName>test</serverName>
   </configuration>
</plugin>
----

> . Run `**_mvn liberty:create_**` to create an Open Liberty server `test`

Author: ```suggestion
. Run `mvn liberty:create` to create an Open Liberty server `test`
```

. Specify the feature to install for the `test` server.
+
Open `${project.build.testOutputDirectory}/wlp/server.xml` file and add the user feature. The `usr` extension indicates that the feature will be installed to the `${project.build.testOutputDirectory}/wlp/usr` directory. It also tells the server where to find the user feature when the server starts.
+
[source, xml]
.server.xml
----
<featureManager>
  <acceptLicense>true</acceptLicense>
  <feature>usr:SimpleActivator</feature>
</featureManager>
----

. Import the BOM file we created earlier by adding the following to the pom.xml.
+
[source, xml]
----
<dependencyManagement>
   <dependencies>
     <dependency>
       <groupId>test.user.test.osgi</groupId>
       <artifactId>features-bom</artifactId>
       <version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
       <type>pom</type>
     </dependency>
   </dependencies>
 </dependencyManagement>
----

> . Run `**_mvn liberty:prepare-feature_**` to generate a `features.json` file. The `features.json` file is a JSON file that contains the information found within a feature's ESA manifest file. JSONs are a key requirement for the installation of any Open Liberty features(s) from a Maven repository.

Author: ```suggestion
. Run `mvn liberty:prepare-feature` to generate a `features.json` file. The `features.json` file is a JSON file that contains the information found within a feature's ESA manifest file. JSONs are a key requirement for the installation of any Open Liberty features(s) from a Maven repository.
```

> . Run `**_mvn liberty:install-feature liberty:start_**` to install the user feature and start the server. In the server `messages.log`, you will see `"Sample bundle starting"` when the server starts and `"Sample bundle stopping"` when the server stops, which is the logic we implemented in our `BundleActivator` class.

Author: ```suggestion
. Run `mvn liberty:install-feature liberty:start` to install the user feature and start the server. In the server `messages.log`, you will see `"Sample bundle starting"` when the server starts and `"Sample bundle stopping"` when the server stops, which is the logic we implemented in our `BundleActivator` class.
```
